Page on functions and steps (#797)
inngest/website: pages/docs/learn/inngest-steps.mdx

import IconConcurrency from 'src/shared/Icons/FlowControl/Concurrency';

export const description = 'Learn about Inngest steps and their methods.';

# Inngest Steps

Steps are fundamental building blocks in Inngest functions. Each step represents individual task (or other unit of work) within a function that can be executed independently.

Steps are crucial because they allow functions to run specific tasks in a controlled and sequential (or parallel) manner. You can build complex workflows by chaining together simple, discrete operations.

On this page, you will learn about the benefits of using steps, and get an overview of the available step methods.

## Benefits of Using Steps

- **Improved reliability**: structured steps enable precise control and handling of each task within a function.
- **Error handling**: capturing and managing errors at the step level means better error recovery.
- **Retry mechanism**: failing steps can be retried and recovered independently, without re-executing other successful steps.
- **Independent testing**: each step can be tested and debugged independently from others.

> - **Improved code readability**: modular approach makes code easier to navigate and refactor.

Reviewer: Really like these!

If you'd like to learn more about how Inngest steps are executed, check the ["How Inngest functions are executed"](/docs/learn/how-functions-are-executed) page.

## Anatomy of an Inngest Step

> The first argument of every Inngest step method is an `id`. Each step is treated as a separate job which can be individually retried, debugged, or recovered. Inngest uses the ID to memoize step state across function versions.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: "job" might feel weird as we might reference the entire function as a "background job" elsewhere.
```suggestion
The first argument of every Inngest step method is an `id`. Each step is treated as a discrete task which can be individually retried, debugged, or recovered. Inngest uses the ID to memoize step state across function versions.
```

```typescript
export default inngest.createFunction(
  { id: "import-product-images" },
  { event: "shop/product.imported" },
  async ({ event, step }) => {
    const uploadedImageURLs = await step.run(
      // step ID
      "copy-images-to-s3", 
      // other arguments, in this case: a handler
      async () => {
        return copyAllImagesToS3(event.data.imageURLs);
    });
  }
);
```

> The ID is also used as an identifier in the [Inngest Dev Server](/docs/local-development) for you to quickly find a specific step.

Reviewer: This is also used in Cloud, so maybe not just dev server specific here (similar to comment on function guide)

## Available Step Methods

### <a href="/docs/reference/functions/step-run" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/><pre>step.run()</pre></a> {{anchor: false}}

> This method executes a defined piece of code. Use it to run synchronous or asynchronous code as a retriable step in your function.

Reviewer: This should probably mention that:

"Code within `step.run` is: automatically retried when it throws an error and does not re-run when another step throws an error."

Author: Thank you!

This method pauses execution until a specific date time. Any date time string in the format accepted by the Date object, for example `YYYY-MM-DD` or `YYYY-MM-DDHH:mm:ss`.

```typescript
export default inngest.createFunction(
  { id: "send-scheduled-reminder" },
  { event: "app/reminder.scheduled" },
  async ({ event, step }) => {
    const date = new Date(event.data.remind_at);
    await step.sleepUntil("wait-for-the-date", date);
    // Do something else
  }
);
```

### <a href="/docs/reference/functions/step-wait-for-event" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/><pre>step.waitForEvent()</pre></a> {{anchor: false}}

This method pauses the execution until a specific event is received.

```typescript
export default inngest.createFunction(
  { id: "send-onboarding-nudge-email" },
  { event: "app/account.created" },
  async ({ event, step }) => {
    const onboardingCompleted = await step.waitForEvent(
      "wait-for-onboarding-completion",
      { event: "app/onboarding.completed", timeout: "3d", match: "data.userId" }
    );
    // Do something else
  }
);
```

> ### <a href="/docs/reference/functions/step-send-event" className="flex items-center gap-4"><IconConcurrency size="2rem"/><pre>step.sendEvent()</pre></a> {{anchor: false}}

Reviewer: I might order invoke above sendEvent as I think it's usually what developers want. It then could be explained as "Use send event when you want to trigger other functions, but you do not need to return the result." I think the order of invoke (you need the result) feels more like a good default then the option of sending an event (don't need the result) feels like a logical progression.

This method comes with its own configuration, which enables defining specific settings like concurrency limits.

```typescript
// A function we will call in another place in our app
const computeSquare = inngest.createFunction(
  { id: "compute-square" },
  { event: "calculate/square" },
  async ({ event }) => {
    return { result: event.data.number * event.data.number }; // Result typed as { result: number }
  }
);

// In this function, we'll call `computeSquare`
const mainFunction = inngest.createFunction(
  { id: "main-function" },
  { event: "main/event" },
  async ({ step }) => {
    const square = await step.invoke("compute-square-value", {
      function: computeSquare,
      data: { number: 4 }, // input data is typed, requiring input if it's needed
    });

    return `Square of 4 is ${square.result}.`; // square.result is typed as number
  }
);
```

## Further reading

> - ["How Inngest functions are executed"](/docs/learn/how-functions-are-executed): learn more about Inngest's execution model, including how steps are handled.

Reviewer: Should we add multi-step functions here as well?
